'''TTM''' is a [[programming language]] developed in 1968
by Steven Caine and E. Kent Gordon at the
[[California Institute of Technology]].
The following description is taken from the original
TTM reference manual [[ttm68]].

TTM Is a recursive, interpretive language designed primarily
for string manipulation, text editing, macro definition and
expansion, and other applications generally classified as
systems programming. It is derived, primarily, from GAP
[[GAP]] and GPM [[GPM]].

Initially, TIM was planned as the macro processing portion
of an assembler for the IBM System/360 and, as such, was
designed to overcome the restrictions and inconsistencies
which existed in the standard assemblers for that system
[9,10], In addition, it was designed to have all of the
power possessed by earlier general macro assemblers but with
the unfortunate syntactic and semantic difficulties removed
[4,5,6,7,8].

During the development of TIM, it became apparent that
applications other than assembler macro processing were
possible. These include data editing, text manipulation,
expression compiling, and macro processing for language
processors other than assemblers.

The initial version of TTM was implemented to run in a
conversational manner under the Caltech Basic Time Sharing
System for the IBM System/360-50 [13].
Other versions have been written to run in the batch processing environment
of OS/360 and to operate in front of or in conjunction with
various language processors.

==Notes==

* Although unacknowledged, TTM appears to have been inspired
by [[TRAC]] and the description of the characteristics of TRAC
also apply to TTM.

==References==

# Greenwald, I.D. and Kane, M, The Share 709 System: Programming and Modification. JACM 6 No. 2 (1959). pp. 128-133.
# Greenwald, I.D*, Handling Macro Instructions. CACM 2, No. 11 (1959), 21-22.
# Remington Rand UNIVAC Division, UNIVAC Generalized Programming. Philadelphia, 1957.
# Eastwood, D.E. and Mcllroy, M.D., Macro Compiler Modification of SAP. Bell Telephone Laboratories Computation Center, 1959.
# McClure, R.M., Description of CODAPT Assembler, 1960.
# Caine, S.H., Reference Manual for CIT 7090/7040 Experimental Macro Assembly Program (XMAP). California Institute of Technology, Willis H. Booth Computing Center (1964).
# Mcllroy, M.D., Macro Instruction Extensions of Compiler Languages. CACM 3, No. 4 (1960), 214-220.
# Mcllroy, M.D., Using SAP Macro Instructions to Manipulate Symbolic Expressions. Bell Telephone Laboratories Computation Center (1960).
# IBM, System/360 Assembler Language, C28-6514-4, (1967).
# Caine, S.H. et al., Report of the Systems Objectives and Requirements Committee, SHARE, 1965, pp. 29-40.
# Struachey, C., A General Purpose Macro Generator. Comput J 8, 3(1965), pp. 225-241.
# Farber, D. J., 635 Assembly System - GAP. Bell Telephone Laboratories Computation Center (1964).
# Caine, S.H., et al., An Operating Environment for Programming Research. California Institute of Technology, Willis H. Booth Computing Center Programming Report No. 1, 1967.
# Caine, S.H. and Gordon, E.K., TTM: An Experimental Interpretive Language. California Institute of Technology, Willis H. Booth Computing Center, Programming Report No. 7, 1968.
# Caine, S.H. and Gordon, E.K., TTM: A Macro Language for Batch Processing. California Institute of Technology, Willis H. Booth Computing Center, Programming Report No. 8 May, 1969.

==External links==

*[http://sourceforge.net/projects/ttm A reference implementation
of TTM] on [[sourceforge]].

[[Category:Macro programming languages]]

[[es:TTM (lenguaje de programación)]]
[[fr:TTTM (langage de programmation)]]
